vaivasvatākhyamanuputranabhāgajāta-
nābhāganāmakanarendrasuto'mbarīṣa: |
saptārṇavāvṛtamahīdayito'pi reme
tvatsaṅgiṣu tvayi ca magnamanāssadaiva ||1||
vaivasvata-ākhya-manu-	Vaivasvat named, the Manu
putra-nabhāga-	his son Nabhaag
jāta-nābhāga-nāmaka-	to him was born Naabhaag named (son)
narendra-suta:-ambarīṣa:	(his) son king Ambareesh
sapta-arṇava-āvṛta-	by the seven seas surrounded
mahī-dayita:api	the earth even though he ruled
reme tvat-saṅgiṣu	(he) delighted in Thy devotees' (company)
tvayi ca	and in Thyself
magna-manā:-sadaiva	whole heartedly, always
Nabhaag was the son of Vaivasvata Manu, to whom Naabhaaga was born. To him king Ambareesh was born who ruled the earth surrounded by the seven seas. Yet, Ambareesh always delighted in serving Thy devotees and in worshipping Thee whole heartedly.
tvatprītaye sakalameva vitanvato'sya
bhaktyaiva deva nacirādabhṛthā: prasādam |
yenāsya yācanamṛte'pyabhirakṣaṇārthaṃ
cakraṃ bhavān pravitatāra sahasradhāram ||2||
tvat-prītaye	for Thy pleasure
sakalam-eva vitanvata:-	everything even performing everything
asya bhaktyā-eva	by his devotion alone
deva	O Lord!
nacirāt-abhṛthā: prasādam	in no time he gained Thy grace
yena-	by which
asya yācanam-ṛte-api-	even without his asking
abhirakṣaṇa-artham	for (his) protection
cakraṃ bhavān pravitatāra	(Thy) discus Thou employed
sahasradhāram	which is thousand pointed
Performing all his action in total dedication to Thee, O Lord! He soon gained Thy grace. By virtue of which, even without his asking, Thou commissioned Thy thousand pointed discus to protect him.
sa dvādaśīvratamatho bhavadarcanārthaṃ
varṣaṃ dadhau madhuvane yamunopakaṇṭhe |
patnyā samaṃ sumanasā mahatīṃ vitanvan
pūjāṃ dvijeṣu visṛjan paśuṣaṣṭikoṭim ||3||
sa dvādaśī-vratam-atha:	he, the rites of Dwaadashi, then,
bhavat-arcana-artham	to worship Thee
varṣaṃ dadhau madhuvane	for one year, observed in Madhuvana
yamunā-upakaṇṭhe	near the river Yamuna
patnyā samaṃ sumanasā	with his pious wife
mahatīṃ vitanvan pūjāṃ	he performed a great poojaa
dvijeṣu visṛjan	to the priests giving away
paśu-ṣaṣṭi-koṭim	sixty crores of cows
In order to worship Thee, along with his pious wife, he observed the Dwaadashi fasting rites for one year on the banks of the Yamuna river, in Maduvana. He conducted a great poojaa, honouring holy men and by giving away to them sixty crores of cows.
tatrātha pāraṇadine bhavadarcanānte
durvāsasā'sya muninā bhavanaṃ prapede |
bhoktuṃ vṛtaścasa nṛpeṇa parārtiśīlo
mandaṃ jagāma yamunāṃ niyamānvidhāsyan ||4||
tatra-atha pāraṇa-dine	there then on the day of taking the food (breaking the fast)
bhavat-arcana-ante	after Thy worship was performed
durvāsasā-asya muninā	the sage Durvaasaa, his (of the king Ambareesh)
bhavanaṃ prapede	palace reached
bhoktuṃ vṛta:-ca sa nṛpeṇa	and he was invited for food by the king
parārtiśīla:	(the sage) who had the habit of being inconsiderate
mandaṃ jagāma yamunāṃ	leisurely approached the river Yamuna
niyamān-vidhāsyan	to perform his obligatory rites
Then, there, after Thy worship was performed, on the day of the breaking of the fast and taking food, the sage Durvaasaa arrived at the king's palace, and was invited to take food. The sage who was by nature inconsiderate and a trouble giver, leisurely went to the river Yamunaa to perform his obligatory rites.
rājñā'tha pāraṇamuhūrtasamāptikhedā-
dvāraiva pāraṇamakāri bhavatpareṇa |
prāpto munistadatha divyadṛśā vijānan
kṣipyan krudhoddhṛtajaṭo vitatāna kṛtyām ||5||
rājñā-atha	then by the king
pāraṇa-muhurta-samāpti-khedāt	because of the anxiety of the expiry of the time of taking food
vārā-eva pāraṇam-akāri	by taking water alone, the fast was broken
bhavat-pareṇa	(by the king who) was devoted to Thee
prāpta: muni:-tat-atha	then that sage arriving
divya-dṛśā vijānan	by his divine insight knowing
kṣipyan	rebuking (the king)
krudhā-uddhṛta-jaṭa:	out of anger plucked his matted hair
vitatāna kṛtyām	and created Krityaa (an evil spirit)
The king was anxious as the time was expiring for taking food. So, the king Ambareesha who was devoted to Thee broke the fast by taking a sip of water. When the sage arrived and came to know by his divine insight of what had happened, he rebuked the king and angrily plucked his matted hair and created Krityaa an evil spirit.
kṛtyāṃ ca tāmasidharāṃ bhuvanaṃ dahantī-
magre'bhivīkṣyanṛpatirna padāccakampe |
tvadbhaktabādhamabhivīkṣya sudarśanaṃ te
kṛtyānalaṃ śalabhayan munimanvadhāvīt ||6||
kṛtyāṃ ca tām-asi-dharāṃ	and that Krityaa holding a sword
bhuvanaṃ dahantīm-	scorching the world
agre-abhivīkṣya-	seeing in front
nṛpati:-na padāt-cakampe	the king did not move from his place
tvat-bhakta-bādham-	attacking of Thy devotee
abhivīkṣya sudarśanaṃ te	seeing, Thy Sudarshana (Discus)
kṛtyā-analaṃ śalabhayan	the fire of Krityaa doused like a moth
munim-anvadhāvīt	and chased the sage
The king seeing in front the spirit holding a sword and scorching the world, did not budge a bit from his place. Noticing Thy devotee in danger, Thy Discus Sudarshana consumed Krityaa's fire like a moth and then chased the sage who was running away.
dhāvannaśeṣabhuvaneṣu bhiyā sa paśyan
viśvatra cakramapi te gatavān viriñcam |
ka: kālacakramatilaṅghayatītyapāsta:
śarvaṃ yayau sa ca bhavantamavandataiva ||7||
dhāvan-aśeṣa-bhuvaneṣu	running in all the worlds
bhiyā sa paśyan viśvatra	fearfully he seeing everywhere
cakram-api te	Thy discus alone
gatavān viriñcam	went to Brahmaa
ka:-kāla-cakram-atilaṅghayati-	who can overcome the wheel of time'
iti-apāsta:	thus (saying) was dismissed
śarvaṃ yayau sa ca	he (Durvaasaa) also went to Shiva
bhavantaṃ avandata eva	he (who) made obeisance to Thee alone
Running around the limitless worlds fearfully, Durvaasaa saw Thy discus alone everywhere. He went to Brahmaa for respite, who dismissed him saying that who could overcome the wheel of time. He then went to Shiva, he who also made obeisance to Thee alone.
bhūyo bhavannilayametya muniṃ namantaṃ
proce bhavānahamṛṣe nanu bhaktadāsa: |
jñānaṃ tapaśca vinayānvitameva mānyaṃ
yāhyambarīṣapadameva bhajeti bhūman ||8||
bhūya: bhavat-nilayam-etya	then reaching Thy abode
muniṃ namantaṃ proce	to the sage who was prostrating, said
bhavāna-aham-ṛṣe	Thou 'I am, O Rishi,
nanu bhakta-dāsa:	only a servant of my devotees
jñānaṃ tapa:-ca	knowledge and austerity
vinaya-ānvitam-eva mānyam	combined with modesty only is respected
yāhi	go
ambarīṣa-padam-eva bhaja-	seek shelter at the feet of Ambareesh himself'
iti bhūman	thus, O Infinite Lord! (Thou said to him)
Then, when the sage Durvaasaa reached Thy abode and was prostrating before Thee, O Infinite Lord! Thou told him,'O Rishi, I am only a servant of my devotees. Knowledge and austerity combined with modesty and humility only is respected. Go and seek shelter at the feet of Ambareesh himself.
tāvatsametya muninā sa gṛhītapādo
rājā'pasṛtya bhavadastramasāvanauṣīt |
cakre gate muniradādakhilāśiṣo'smai
tvadbhaktimāgasi kṛte'pi kṛpāṃ ca śaṃsan ||9||
tāvat-sametya	then coming back
muninā sa gṛhīta-pād:	by the sage, whose feet were clasped
rājā-apasṛtya	the king (Ambareesh) moved away
bhavat-astram-asau-anauṣīt	he then praised Thy weapon Sudarshan
cakre gate	when the discus went away
muni:-adāt-	the sage gave
akhila-āśiṣa:-asmai	all the blessings to him
tvat-bhaktim-	and devotion to Thee
agāsi kṛte-api	even though wronged
kṛpāṃ ca śaṃsan	also praised (the king's) kindness,
Coming back to Ambareesh, the sage clasped his feet for pardon. The king moved back and withdrew his feet out of humility and praised Thy weapon the discus Sudarshana.On the discus retiring, the sage was all praises for Ambareesh for his devotion and the kindness shown in spite of being wronged. He gave the king all the blessings.
rājā pratīkṣya munimekasamāmanāśvān
sambhojya sādhu tamṛṣiṃ visṛjan prasannam |
bhuktvā svayaṃ tvayi tato'pi dṛḍhaṃ rato'bhū-
tsāyujyamāpa ca sa māṃ pavaneśa pāyā: ||10||
rājā pratīkṣya munim-	the king awaiting the sage
ekasamām-anāśvān	for one year did not take food
sambhojya sādhu	feeding well
tam-ṛṣim	that sage
visṛjan prasannam	and sending him off pleased
bhuktvā svayaṃ	taking food himself
tvayi tata:-api	to Thee even more
dṛḍhaṃ rata:-abhūt-	firmly devoted became
sāyujyam-āpa ca sa	and he attained union with Thee
māṃ pavaneśa pāyā:	me, O Lord of Guruvaayur! Protect
The king waited for the sage to return and did not take food for one year.Then he fed him well and sent him off happy, after which only he took food himself.The king became more firmly devoted to Thee than before and ultimately attained union with Thee. O Lord of Guruvaayur! May Thou protect me.